<!--
%CopyrightBegin%

Copyright Ericsson AB 2023. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

%CopyrightEnd%
-->
# Introduction

[](){: #oam-principles }

The Operation and Maintenance (OAM) support in OTP consists of a generic model
for management subsystems in OTP, and some components to be used in these
subsystems. This section describes the model.

The main idea in the model is that it is not tied to any specific management
protocol. An Application Programming Interface (API) is defined, which can be
used to write adaptations for specific management protocols.

Each OAM component in OTP is implemented as one sub-application, which can be
included in a management application for the system. Notice that such a complete
management application is not in the scope of this generic functionality.
However, this section includes examples illustrating how such an application can
be built.

## Terminology

The protocol-independent architectural model on the network level is the
well-known client-server model for management operations. This model is based on
the client-server principle, where the manager (client) sends a request from a
manager to an agent (server) when it accesses management information. The agent
sends a reply back to the manager. There are two main differences to the normal
client-server model:

- Usually a few managers communicate with many agents.
- The agent can spontaneously send a notification, for example, an alarm, to the
  manager.

The following picture illustrates the idea:

![Terminology](assets/terminology.gif "Terminology")

The manager is often referred to as the _Network Management System (NMS)_, to
emphasize that it usually is realized as a program that presents data to an
operator.

The agent is an entity that executes within a _Network Element (NE)_. In OTP,
the NE can be a distributed system, meaning that the distributed system is
managed as one entity. Of course, the agent can be configured to be able to run
on one of several nodes, making it a distributed OTP application.

The management information is defined in a _Management Information Base (MIB)_.
It is a formal definition of which information the agent makes available to the
manager. The manager accesses the MIB through a management protocol, such as
SNMP, CMIP, HTTP, or CORBA. Each protocol has its own MIB definition language.
In SNMP, it is a subset of ASN.1, in CMIP it is GDMO, in HTTP it is implicit,
and using CORBA, it is IDL.

Usually, the entities defined in the MIB are called _Managed Objects (MOs)_,
although they do not have to be objects in the object-oriented way. For example,
a simple scalar variable defined in a MIB is called an MO. The MOs are logical
objects, not necessarily with a one-to-one mapping to the resources.

## Model

This section presents the generic protocol-independent model for use within an
OTP-based NE. This model is used by all OAM components and can be used by the
applications. The advantage of the model is that it clearly separates the
resources from the management protocol. The resources do not need to be aware of
which management protocol is used to manage the system. The same resources can
therefore be managed with different protocols.

The entities involved in this model are the agent, which terminates the
management protocol, and the resources, which is to be managed, that is, the
actual application entities. The resources should in general have no knowledge
of the management protocol used, and the agent should have no knowledge of the
managed resources. This implies that a translation mechanism is needed, to
translate the management operations to operations on the resources. This
translation mechanism is usually called _instrumentation_ and the function that
implements it is called _instrumentation function_. The instrumentation
functions are written for each combination of management protocol and resource
to be managed. For example, if an application is to be managed by SNMP and HTTP,
two sets of instrumentation functions are defined; one that maps SNMP requests
to the resources, and one that, for example, generates an HTML page for some
resources.

When a manager makes a request to the agent, the following illustrates the
situation:

![Request to An Agent by a Manager](assets/snmp_model_1.gif "Request to An Agent by a Manager")

The mapping between an instrumentation function and a resource is not
necessarily 1-1. It is also possible to write one instrumentation function for
each resource, and use that function from different protocols.

The agent receives a request and maps it to calls to one or more instrumentation
functions. These functions perform operations on the resources to implement the
semantics associated with the MO.

For example, a system that is managed with SNMP and HTTP can be structured as
follows:

![Structure of a System Managed with SNMP and HTTP](assets/snmp_model_2.gif "Structure of a System Managed with SNMP and HTTP")

The resources can send notifications to the manager as well. Examples of
notifications are events and alarms. The resource needs to generate
protocol-independent notifications. The following picture illustrates how this
is achieved:

![Notification Handling](assets/snmp_model_3.gif "Notification Handling")

The main idea is that the resource sends the notifications as Erlang terms to a
dedicated `gen_event` process. Into this process, handlers for the different
management protocols are installed. When an event is received by this process,
it is forwarded to each installed handler. The handlers are responsible for
translating the event into a notification to be sent over the management
protocol. For example, a handler for SNMP translates each event into an SNMP
trap.

## SNMP-Based OAM

For all OAM components, SNMP adaptations are provided. Other adaptations might
be defined in the future.

The OAM components, and some other OTP applications, define SNMP MIBs. These
MIBs are written in SNMPv2 SMI syntax, as defined in RFC 1902. For convenience
we also deliver the SNMPv1 SMI equivalent. All MIBs are designed to be v1/v2
compatible, that is, the v2 MIBs do not use any construct not available in v1.

### MIB Structure

The top-level OTP MIB is called `OTP-REG` and it is included in the SNMP
application. All other OTP MIBs import some objects from this MIB.

Each MIB is contained in one application. The MIB text files are stored under
`mibs/<MIB>.mib` in the application directory. The generated `.hrl` files with
constant declarations are stored under `include/<MIB>.hrl`, and the compiled
MIBs are stored under `priv/mibs/<MIB>.bin`.

An application that needs to import an MIB into another MIB is to use the `il`
option to the SNMP MIB compiler:

```erlang
snmp:c("MY-MIB", [{il, ["snmp/priv/mibs"]}]).
```

If the application needs to include a generated `.hrl` file, it is to use the
`-include_lib` directive to the Erlang compiler:

```erlang
-module(my_mib).
-include_lib("snmp/include/OTP-REG.hrl").
```

Here is a list of some of the MIBs defined in the OTP system:

- `OTP-REG` (in SNMP) contains the top-level OTP registration objects, used by
  all other MIBs.
- `OTP-TC` (in SNMP) contains the general Textual Conventions, which can be used
  by any other MIB.
- `OTP-SNMPEA-MIB` (in `snmp`) contains objects for instrumentation and control
  of the extensible SNMP agent itself. The agent also implements the standard
  SNMPv2-MIB (or v1 part of MIB-II, if SNMPv1 is used).

The different applications use different strategies for loading the MIBs into
the agent. Some MIB implementations are code-only, while others need a server.
One way, used by the code-only MIB implementations, is for the user to call a
function such as `snmpa:load_mibs(Agent, [Mib])` to load the MIB, and
`snmpa:unload_mibs(Agent, [Mib])` to unload the MIB. See the manual page for
each application for a description of how to load each MIB.
